
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75118 ***





CHRISTMAS UNDER THREE FLAGS




A Merry Christmas to One and All

[Illustration: The Model American Home]




  Christmas Under Three Flags

  BEING MEMORIES OF HOLIDAY FESTIVITIES IN
  THE WHITE HOUSE WITH “OLD HICKORY,”
  IN THE PALACE OF H. R. H. PRINCE OF
  PRUSSIA, AFTERWARDS EMPEROR WILLIAM I.,
  AND AT THE ALAMO WITH THE ALCALDE’S
  DAUGHTER.

  MARY EMILY DONELSON WILCOX

  Illustrated

  [Illustration]

  Washington
  Published by The Neale Company
  m c m




  Copyrighted, 1900, by Mary Emily Donelson Wilcox




  LOVINGLY DEDICATED TO THE DEAR
  DAUGHTER WHO DEDICATES
  HER LIFE TO ME




CONTENTS

[Illustration]


  SANCTA CLAUS AT THE WHITE HOUSE IN OLD HICKORY’S DAY      17

  A ROYAL CHRISTMAS TREE, BERLIN, 1847                      47

  THE ALCALDE’S DAUGHTER AND HER CHRISTMAS LAMP             71




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

[Illustration]


  The Model American Home                                    6

  Andrew Jackson                                            16

  Mrs. Andrew Jackson                                       21

  Mrs. Emily Donelson                                       29

  Rachel Donelson                                           33

  Martin Van Buren                                          41

  Brandenburg Gate, Berlin                                  49

  Louise, Queen of Prussia, and her Sons Frederic
    William and William                                     53

  The Old Sans Souci Mill                                   61

  William I., Emperor of Germany                            65

  The Alamo                                                 73

  The Alcalde’s Daughter                                    81

  San Fernando Cathedral                                    89




[Illustration: Andrew Jackson]




SANCTA CLAUS AT THE WHITE HOUSE IN OLD HICKORY’S DAY.

[Illustration]


Through the mist of years I recall a Merry Christmas in my childhood’s
home long ago, and sweeter than music across still waters come memories
of the blessed influences voicing in that historic mansion on that
memorable occasion the glad tidings from Bethlehem: “Peace on earth,
good will towards men.” The White House, always an ideal domestic
center, was, during President Jackson’s occupancy, the model American
home--love, kindness and charity guarding it like sentries, happiness
and content overshadowing it like angel wings. Known to the world
as the man whose iron will and fierce, ungovernable temper defied
opposition and courted antagonism, he was the gentlest, tenderest,
most patient of men at his own fireside. His household included the
families of his adopted son and private secretary, and Mrs. Donelson
and Mrs. Jackson, handsome, accomplished, refined; Major Donelson
and Mr. Jackson, brave, cultured, public-spirited, ably assisted
him in discharging his high duties, and by their tact and grace
obtained for his administration its unequaled social prestige. Loving,
enjoying children as childless old people often do, and never so
happy as when giving happiness to others, he made life for us little
ones,--Donelsons, four; Jacksons, two--clustering around his knee as
around a doting grandfather’s, well worth living.

Among the many bright incidents associated with the special Christmas
so pleasantly remembered to-day were an East Room frolic and an
unforgetable visit from Sancta Claus. The invitations for the former,
which was probably the most enjoyable and successful juvenile fête
ever given at the National Capital, read: “The children of President
Jackson’s family request you to join them on Christmas Day, at four
o’clock P. M., in a frolic in the East Room. Washington, December 19,
1835.”

Delivering them, receiving the acceptances,--there were few
regrets,--selecting the games to be played and arranging other matters
relating thereto, proved inexhaustible sources of fun, subordinate
only to curiosity as to Sancta Claus and his mysterious movements.
His generosity on former occasions tempted us to expect great results
from his next visit, and, wondering whether he would come, if so, what
he would bring us, how he looked and where he lived, we questioned the
house servants and attendants, with whom we were privileged pets and
among whom were some most interesting personalities; their answers,
however, unlike the enchanted oracle in fairy lore, neither removing
doubt nor confirming hope.

Mammy, a large, handsome mulatto, saucy and good-natured, fussy and
domineering, as nursery autocrats generally are, and whom we both loved
and feared, said: “I wish to goodness you children would stop talking
about old Sindy Klaws. I’d laugh if, tired of roaming ’round nights,
filling stockings, he’d stay at home and roast chestnuts by his own
fire.”

Jimmy O’Neil, our favorite usher and a typical son of Erin, said: “I
could tell you lots about Saint Patrick, but mighty little about Sindy
Klaws. I think, however, he and I must look alike, for Mammy always
says when I make her a present, ‘Go away, Jimmy, you’re as big a fool
as Sindy Klaws, always giving people things.’” We shook our heads. “No,
no, Jimmy; you are thin as a rail, have black, scraggly hair, a long,
sharp nose and no beard, and everybody knows Sancta Claus to be fat,
squatty, with a red face, long white beard and wearing a baggy coat
crammed with toys and goodies.”

Vivart, the French cook, whose toothsome sweets invested him with great
importance in our hungry eyes and whom we waylaid on his morning visit
to my mother, said: “I no acquaint with Monsieur Sancta Claus; he no
live in Paris. In my beautiful France across the blue sea _les petits
enfans_ never ask questions, speak only when spoken to, then with
modest curtsies and downcast eyes.”

“Ah, ha!” chuckled Mammy, “Mr. Vivart gives you a lesson in manners.”

Hans, the German gardener, whose stories about Rhine castles and Black
Forest witches and fairies were even more relished than the fruit and
flowers he brought upstairs every morning, said: “I’m sure Kris Kringle
will come; he might forget some children, but not White House ones,
though I think it strange he does not hang his pretty things on a green
tree instead of stuffing them in ugly stockings. How I wish you could
see the beautiful trees which the boys and girls in Germany trim and
light on Christmas Eve, and where they gather to sing songs, play games
and exchange presents. Heaven seems very near at those times.”

[Illustration: Mrs. Andrew Jackson]

“Your German trees may be lovely, Hans,” said Carita, a Mexican
embroideress occasionally employed by my mother, “but they can’t
compare with the fancy lamps which the Rio Grande _ninitos_ hang on
poles and bushes near their homes on Christmas Eve, and beneath which
they find the next morning the beautiful gifts left for them by the
Infant Jesus on His way from heaven to the Virgin’s arms.”

She often told us stories descriptive of Mexican customs, and had just
commenced one about the Alcalde’s daughter when Mammy called us to put
on our wraps to go riding with the President, who wished us to meet him
at the front door. Something like the “Divinity that doth hedge a king”
invested him in our eyes, and always granting, often anticipating, his
wishes, we never dared oppose or disobey his orders. While waiting,
George, the coachman, told us of some bad children who found in their
Christmas stockings a bundle of peach tree switches wrapped in paper
labeled: “To be applied when spanking has proved insufficient,” and
said he hoped we would fare better. Now we had on several occasions
come in close contact with peach tree switches, but we did not thank
George for reminding us of the stinging experiences.

“To the Orphan Asylum,” said the President on entering the carriage,
in which were several packages, and up in front was a basket of good
things. He often drove there, taking me, cousin Rachel (his adopted
son’s daughter and the apple of his eye), and John along. It was at
that time a small, modest structure with a limited number of patients,
but its foundress, Mrs. Van Ness, had secured for it some influential
patrons, among whom President Jackson, to whom all orphans were
objects of tender solicitude, was not the least zealous. The following
conversation enlivened the ride:

John: “Uncle” (the name affectionately applied to him by his wife’s
nieces and nephews), “did you ever see Sancta Claus?”

The President, eyeing John curiously over his spectacles: “No, my boy;
I never did.”

John: “Mammy thinks he’ll not come to-night. Did you ever know him to
behave that way?”

The President: “We can only wait and see. I once knew a little boy who
not only never heard of Christmas or Sancta Claus, but never had a toy
in his life; and after the death of his mother, a pure, saintly woman,
had neither home nor friends.”

Chorus of children: “Poor little fellow! Had he come to the White House
we would have shared our playthings with him.”

The children, quick to detect emotion, felt that some sad memory
stirred the old man’s heart, though we little suspected he was
referring to his own desolate childhood.

The President, after some moments’ silence: “The best way to secure
happiness is to bestow it on others, and we’ll begin our holiday by
remembering the little ones who have no mothers or fathers to brighten
life for them.” To the sweet-faced matron who welcomed us he said:
“Here I am with some Christmas cheer for your young charges.” The
children gathered in the reception room, and it was gratifying to
see their faces light up as, greeting each one, he distributed his
gifts, and even more gratifying was it to note his pleasure at their
grateful surprise. Raising in his arms a crippled boy, who replied
to his inquiry, “Better, General; but, oh! so tired,” he gave him a
jumping-jack, saying: “Let’s see how this works,” and the delighted
child cried: “Ain’t that cute? Hopping up and down just like an organ
grinder’s monkey.”

The day, warm and bright, was more like May than December; the parks,
then only grassy commons shaded by native trees, were still green, and
the roses in the grounds adjoining all buildings were still in full
bloom.

Returning home we called at several houses to leave Christmas souvenirs
sent by my mother and Mrs. Jackson: a package of snuff for Mrs.
Madison, then visiting Washington relatives; a hand-painted mirror
for Mr. Van Buren, who was reputed to be on very good terms with his
looking-glass, and some embroidered handkerchiefs (Carita’s handiwork)
for intimate friends.

During President Jackson’s incumbency the White House family, children
included, except on state occasions, met at meal time, breakfast being
at eight o’clock, dinner at two, and supper at half-past six. Mrs.
Donelson sat at the head of the table, the President at the foot; we
stood at our chairs until he asked a blessing, and at the close of
meals were excused by a signal--smile or gesture--from my mother.
Always serving the children first, saying they have better appetites,
less patience, and should not be required to wait until their elders
are helped, he encouraged us to talk and ask questions, evidently
enjoying our remarks. He often rose early and went with us to Jackson
(now La Fayette) Square for a game of mumble-the-peg, and occasionally,
when supposed to be wrestling with state problems, hurling anathemas
at Clay, Biddle, Adams, and other opponents, he might have been found
in our play-room soothing some childish grievance or joining in some
impromptu romp.

After supper we began preparations for the all-important,
eagerly-anticipated event, hanging up our stockings. Uncle had invited
us, overruling my mother’s protest that we might disturb him, to use
his room, and thither we merrily trooped, he leading and apparently
deeply interested. My brothers, Jackson and John, cousin Rachel and
I borrowed Mammy’s stockings, which, as she tipped the beam at 200,
were as capacious as the Galilee fishermen’s nets she often referred
to. Cousin Rachel and brother Jackson hung theirs to side hooks on the
mantel, I mine to the fancy hearth broom, and John, who was a born
artist, his to a boot-jack carelessly left on Uncle’s green leather
arm chair; two smaller stockings for the babies, my little sister and
young cousin, dangled from curtain rings at the foot of the bed. In
the center of a large, airy, handsomely-furnished room stood a writing
table at which the President and his Private Secretary often sat until
the “wee sma” hours, discussing state matters and examining documents
relating to them. Amid the papers promiscuously piled up thereon was an
Old Testament that had belonged to his mother, his wife’s Bible and a
frame holding her miniature.

Surveying with delight the room after we had disposed of our stockings,
we declared it reminded us of the Masonic Bazaar being held, which we
had attended. Then brother Jackson had a bright idea. “Why not hang
up a stocking for Uncle?” and running to the Bureau he took a sock
from the bottom drawer, tied it to the tongs and cried: “Now let’s see
how Sancta Claus will treat you, Mr. Uncle Jackson, President of all
these United States!” Surprised and amazed, the old man said: “Well,
well, to think I’ve waited nearly seventy years to hang up a Christmas
stocking.” “Better late than never,” added brother Jackson.

We begged to be allowed to sit up to see Sancta Claus come down the
chimney and pass through the fire without scorching his bundles,
declaring we were not sleepy and promising never to be naughty again;
then when Mammy hustled us off _nolens volens_ to bed, we vowed
we’d lie awake all night, and, still protesting, sank into tired
childhood’s dreamless slumber. About daybreak Mammy’s shrill voice
calling “Christmas gift, you sleepy heads!” awoke us, and amazed,
indignant, to find we had slept soundly after all, we sprang from bed
and darted in our bare feet, unheeding her cries, “Wait till you’re
dressed, you’ll catch your death of cold,” across the hall to Uncle’s
room and asked, “Did Sancta Claus come?” “See for yourselves,” said
he, opening his door. He was up and dressed, had a bright fire, and
watched us tenderly, as rushing in we seized our stockings, each
one, his included, being well filled, and beneath them the presents
we specially desired--for him a cob-pipe, pair of warm slippers
and tobacco bag; for brother Jackson, then eight years old and very
mannish, talking grandly about shooting on the fly and jumping the
hurdle, a small gun, saddle and bridle; for John a hobby horse and
drum, for me and cousin Rachel a doll and tea-set each, and for the
babies toy rattles. Delighted we voted Sancta Claus to be the nicest
old fellow in the world.

[Illustration: Mrs. Emily Donelson]

Had we known our real benefactor we would have felt some
disappointment, dearly as we loved him, for the occult has
indescribable fascination for children, who, though grasping, loving
to hoard and accumulate, find in the mystery surrounding Sancta Claus
a charm surpassing even his bounty. See a child spring from bed early
Christmas morning, grasp and examine its stocking, finding in it
long-coveted, unlooked-for treasures, meanwhile imagining the fat,
white-bearded old man crossing, like “Puss in Boots,” hill and dale,
sea and lake, to bring it presents, bending perchance over its sleeping
form to imprint a kiss, then slipping away without waiting to be
thanked. Can human fancy picture a more entrancing scene? When in after
years does any moment yield more unalloyed bliss?

Mammy, often provoking with her strict notions of nursery discipline,
outdid herself that morning, for though we implored her to let us
empty our stockings just to see if that lump in the toe was a dime
or quarter, she barbarously put them away, and rubbing, scrubbing,
combing, curling, as if for dear life’s sake, dressed us for breakfast.
Below stairs the halls, dining and sitting rooms decorated with cedar
and holly, the vases filled with flowers on tables and mantels, and
huge logs blazing on the hearths, made a cheery, comforting scene.

[Illustration: Rachel Donelson]

Though President Jackson had not for years used any intoxicants, a
bowl of foaming egg-nog graced the side-board, and on tables near were
presents for each member of the household. Mrs. Donelson occupied,
while mistress of the White House, the second-story corner room facing
Pennsylvania Avenue, using the one back of it as a nursery. In the
former three of her children, Mary (myself), John and Rachel, credited
at the time with being the first births in the Executive Mansion, were
born, her eldest child, Jackson, having been born in Tennessee. The
President’s adopted son and daughter occupied the two adjoining rooms,
and he the central one, now known as the Prince of Wales’ room because
used by his Royal Highness when President Buchanan’s guest in 1860.
The play-room, belonging to-day to the official suite, was near the
President’s. His bed, a high, four-post carved mahogany, with tester
and heavy damask curtains, was reached by carpeted steps which we
children dearly loved to scamper up and down. When ill we often carried
him his meals, he reciprocating the attention when we were confined in
bed. Suffering from painful respiration, he slept propped up by high
pillows. Opposite his bed hung his wife’s portrait with pictures of
the two Rachels on either side, a standing breakfast question being,
“Which Rachel did you look at first this morning, uncle?” the lucky
one being the morning belle. The author and sharer of most of our
pleasures, he often shielded us from punishment when naughty, and my
mother once bewailing his over-indulgence, quoted the Bible: “Spare
the rod and spoil the child,” but he replied: “I think, Emily, with
all due deference to the Good Book, that love and patience are better
disciplinarians than rods.” Traveling, he generally took along a box
of silver half-dollars for his namesakes, then both numerous and
ubiquitous, saying to their mothers: “Baby can cut teeth on my gift
now, later show him his country’s eagle thereon, and teach him to love
and honor it.”

We were permitted to spend the morning, and a blissful one it proved,
in the play-room, where Uncle, cousins Sarah and Andrew, my mother
and father, and some playmates joined us and helped us unload our
stockings, finding in each a silver quarter, fruit, candy, cakes and
nuts. Many friends remembered us, White House children then, as now,
exciting much public interest. Many of cousin Rachel’s presents were
beautiful, and two of mine were so unique and pleasure-giving that
after all these sad years they still loom up shining milestones in
childhood’s sunny way. Madame Serrurier of the French Legation sent me
a boy doll wearing the red, brass-button jacket, grey, gold-striped
pants, plumed chapeau, spurs and sabre worn by French postilions. My
god-father, the Vice-President, sent me a miniature cooking stove with
spirit lamp ready to light. I had had many handsome dolls, but never a
boy doll before, and like other foolish mothers welcoming a son after
a succession of disappointing daughters I clasped him in my arms and
crowned him lord and master of my heart. Wherever I went for some weeks
some one would ask: “Mary, how’s your boy?” Lighting the lamp in the
toy stove we boiled water in the tiny kettle and popped corn in the
oven, shouting gleefully when the kettle sang and the corn executed its
staccato dance, occasionally giving us a hot smack on the face or hands.

The etiquette forbidding ladies presiding over Executive Mansions
from receiving or returning social calls was either _non est_ or
disregarded at that time, for Mrs. Donelson, who was many years the
junior of any of her predecessors or successors, and who had that love
of pleasure and desire to please natural to young, attractive women,
had a large visiting list, including most of the ladies prominent in
social and official circles. Among her intimates were Mrs. Macomb, Mrs.
R. E. Lee, from Arlington, Mrs. Rives, Mrs. Blair, Miss Lizzie Blair,
Mrs. Watson and her daughters, Misses Cora Livingston and Rebecca
McLane. Miss Livingston, who was my god-mother and mother’s dearest
friend, was for many years the acknowledged belle of Washington,
many distinguished authors paying homage in familiar writings to her
rare tact and personal charm and imparting to her social triumphs
traditionary interest.

Not the least of that happy day’s diversions was making our toilettes
for the afternoon fête, and it was amusing to see the high and mighty
airs Mammy assumed on the occasion, changing a bow here, supplying
a pin there, arranging plaits, ruffles and puffs, then when she had
finished dressing us surveying her work as an artist might a completed
_chef d’œuvre_. We wore the costumes presented to us by our parents
as Christmas gifts--Cousin Rachel, who was pretty and graceful, a
pink cashmere; I, a blue one; we both wore silk clock stockings
with kid slippers. John was gorgeous in a Highland plaid suit, and
brother Jackson, who was tall, erect and handsome, gave promise in a
brass-button jacket of the gallant officer he afterwards became. Miss
Cora Livingston, who kindly volunteered to chaperone the frolic, came
about four and led the way to the East Room, which was tastefully
decorated with evergreens and flowering plants. Our guests arrived
promptly, and meeting them at the door, we kissed the girls and shook
hands with the boys. The former wore light colors, the latter their
smartest suits, all making a brave showing, though there were no
elaborate costumes, styled Worth confections and suggesting Parisian
ballet dancers, like those seen nowadays at juvenile gatherings.
Among our guests were the Woodbury, Blake, Jones, Lee, Macomb,
Carroll, Graham, Turnbull, Pleasanton, Taney, Corcoran, Peters, and
Hobbie children, with all of whom we were well acquainted, having
dancing-school, Sunday-school, picnic and play-room associations in
common. A few older guests, Mrs. Madison bringing her grand-niece,
Addie Cutts; Mrs. Lee with little Custis, Baroness Krudener, Mesdames
Huygens and Serrurier and Sir Edward Vaughn, joined the President and
members of his family in the Red Room and served as spectators of a
novel and delightful entertainment.

We played “Blind Man’s Buff,” “Hide and Seek,” “Puss-in-the-Corner,”
and several juvenile forfeit games, all entered into with zest and
thoroughly enjoyed, the East Room proving an ideal play-ground, and
the players, free and unrestrained as if on a Texas prairie, romping,
scampering, shouting, laughing, in all the exuberance of childish
merry-making. Mr. Van Buren and Miss Cora joined in, rather led the
games, and added greatly to their success. Several amusing incidents
varied their usual routine. In “Hide and Seek” the switch, after
numerous hot and cold signals, was discovered in a boy’s jacket pocket,
where a mischievous girl had slipped it, and in “Puss-in-the-Corner,”
Willie M----, provoked with Jennie T---- for eluding his grasp, called
out: “You are no pussy, but a slippery old cat.”

Washington gossips accused Mrs. Donelson of heading a conspiracy
to make a match between the Vice-President and Miss Cora, but as
she married a Mr. Barton some years later, and as he never gave his
children a step-mother, those gossips evidently erred then as they
occasionally do to-day. The failure to catch them together beneath the
mistletoe bough suspended from the central East Room chandelier was
probably the only disappointment of the evening, all hoping that such
a conjunction might have auspicious results. Mr. Van Buren, having
incurred a penalty in a forfeit game, was sentenced to stand on one leg
and say:

          “Here I stand all ragged and dirty,
  If you don’t come kiss me I’ll run like a turkey!”

and no kiss being volunteered, he strutted like a game gobbler across
the room, amid peals of laughter. With one exception, the penalties
incurred by the children were bravely paid. Little Mary ----, known to
have a sweet voice, when sentenced to sing “A Paper of Pins,” hung her
head shyly, whispering: “I’d rather dance than sing,” then when led out
to dance she burst out crying, sobbing: “I don’t want to sing or dance.
Please let me alone,” and Miss Cora, taking her on her lap, said: “All
right, Mary, I’ll pay your forfeit,” and sang very sweetly:

  “Oh! I will give you a paper of pins,
  For that is the way that love begins,
  If you will marry--marry, marry me!”

[Illustration: Martin Van Buren]

About six o’clock the dining-room was opened, displaying a picture of
surpassing beauty, one that the four seasons and field, forest, and
lake had united in embellishing. The band stationed in the corridor
struck up the “President’s March,” and Miss Cora, forming us in
line, the younger couples leading, marshaled us into supper. The scene
of many historic banquets, commemorating great events and shared by
world-wide celebrities, that famous room never witnessed one in which
the decorator’s art, or the confectioner’s skill, achieved greater
triumphs--Vivart, hailed as Napoleon of Cooks, Master Chef de Cuisine,
Wizard, Magician, receiving hearty congratulations on all sides.
In the center of a maltese-cross-shaped table towered a pyramid of
snow-balls, interspersed with colored icicles and surmounted by a gilt
game cock, head erect, wings outspread. At the upright ends of the
cross were dishes of frozen marvels, at the top one representing iced
fruits--oranges, apples, pears, peaches, grapes; at the bottom one
representing iced vegetables--corn, carrots, beans, squashes. At one
transverse end was a tiny frosted pine tree, beneath which huddled a
group of toy animals; at the other a miniature rein-deer stood in a
plateau of water in which disported a number of gold-fish. There were
candies, cakes, confections of every conceivable design; delicious
viands, relishes and beverages. Though almost transfixed with admiring
delight, we did ample justice to the tempting repast and eagerly
accepted the lovely ornaments given us as souvenirs.

After supper the central pyramid was demolished and the snow-balls,
which were made of non-combustible starch-coated cotton, each one
enclosing a French pop-kiss, were distributed to us, and we were
invited to play snow-ball in the East Room, an invitation the more
joyfully hailed because the winter having been exceptionally mild
we had been debarred our usual snow-ball games. The balls striking
exploded, and for some moments the East Room was the scene of an
exciting snow flurry, with the startling addition of the thunder
and lightning characteristic of summer storms. The President, Mrs.
Madison, and other elderly guests, who had watched the game from
the southern end of the room, heartily sharing and enjoying the
children’s merriment, were spared, but the players, pelting each other
unmercifully, looked like snow-entrapped wayfarers. It was great fun to
see them dodging the balls and to hear them scream when struck, though
the balls, being soft and light, caused no bruises and inflicted no
damage on clothes or furniture. The game, exhilarating and inspiring,
was provokingly brief, the supply of snow-balls being soon exhausted.
Then the escorts sent for the children having arrived, Miss Cora,
giving us quietly some instructions, reformed us in line as at supper,
the band played a lively air and we marched several times around the
room. The last time, bowing to the group at the upper end, we paused
before the President, and kissing our hands to him said, “Good-night,
General”; he smiling and bowing in return. “What a beautiful sight,”
said Mrs. Madison. “It reminds me of the fairy procession in ‘Midsummer
Night’s Dream.’” “It recalls to me, Madam,” said the President, “our
Divine Master’s words: ‘Suffer little children to come unto me and
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.’”

[Illustration]




A ROYAL CHRISTMAS TREE

BERLIN, 1847

[Illustration]


Among our Berlin acquaintances whom daily association transformed
into friends was Hermina, eldest daughter of Field Marshal von Boyen,
who as Blucher’s aid at Waterloo had greatly distinguished himself.
Fraulein von Boyen, who was beautiful, tactful and accomplished, was
one of the Ladies-in-waiting on the Princess of Prussia, and enjoyed in
an exalted degree her royal mistress’ esteem and confidence. Knowing
we had never participated in a Christmas Tree Celebration and would
consider doing so an inestimable privilege, she offered to obtain for
us an invitation to the Christmas Eve festival at the palace of H. R.
H. the Prince of Prussia. Hence when a liveried courier delivered at
the American Legation an envelope bearing the royal crest we were not
surprised, though immeasurably delighted. The invitation read: “H. R.
H. Crown Princess of Prussia requests the presence of Misses Mary and
Rachel and Master John Donelson at the palace of H. R. H. Prince of
Prussia, December 24, 1847, at three o’clock P. M.--R. S. V. P.” Little
republicans though we were, with democratic ideas of social equality,
we were much elated at the prospect of witnessing a function affording
a glimpse of the inner relations of royal circles.

The best season to observe those domestic customs, associated with
German life and so influential in moulding German character, is
Christmas; the best place is the parental roof, and nothing so
eloquently illustrates the simple faith, the honest trust, the love and
sympathy, which make German homes such centers of peace and content, as
the family Christmas tree.

[Illustration: Brandenburg Gate, Berlin]

Every soldier in camp or barracks, every sailor on shore or in harbor,
all employés of stores or factories, in private or public bureaus, that
can be spared, are granted furloughs, to be spent with the old folks
at home. Gift-making becomes epidemic, all yielding to the infection.
Generally, immediately after the holidays the females of the household
begin preparing gifts for the next Christmas, which include, besides
dainty knick-knacks, exquisite embroideries and costly keepsakes,
useful, serviceable articles, such as flannels, shoes, stockings,
underwear, house linen, wraps and head-gear. Many touching legends
illustrate the kindly sentiments inspired by the occasion.

A little girl whose mother, a poor widow, had told her not to expect
any presents, borrowed pencil and paper, and writing the following
letter, addressed “Holy Child, care of God The Father,” dropped it
in the City Post-Office: “Dear Jesus: Mamma says we are too poor to
celebrate your birth-night, but remembering that you were cradled in a
manger and once were poor and lowly, I ask you to have pity on me. I
want, oh, so much, dear Lord! a new dress, a red rosette for my Sunday
hat, and some shoes--wooden ones will do. Gretchen, No. 10, 5th floor,
Poverty Row.” Her mother took her after dinner to visit the shops and
street bazaars, saying: “Seeing pretty things is almost as nice as
having them.” Imagine Gretchen’s surprise on returning home to find a
small tree, trimmed and ready to light, in their garret, and beneath
it, in addition to the things she had mentioned, a shawl for her mother
and a package of cakes and nuts.

The lover of Roschen, a royal kitchen maid, had been convicted of
larceny and imprisoned. Her master, a liberal, kind-hearted prince,
ordered his steward to distribute, as usual on Christmas, slips
of paper to the under-maids with directions to write thereon the
gifts they preferred. On Roschen’s slip was written: “Most gracious
highness: I appeal through you to God for poor Hans, who, though he
stole, is a fine fellow and very dear to me. That money was stolen to
buy our wedding ring. Pardon him this once and I guarantee he’ll lead
henceforth an honest life.” On the servants’ tree was a box for Roschen
enclosing Hans’ pardon and money to buy wedding suits for each.

[Illustration: Louise, Queen of Prussia, and her Sons Frederic William
and William]

As Frederic William the Fourth was childless, his brother William was
declared heir presumptive and known as Prince of Prussia. Cultured,
refined, with Herculean strength and Apollo-like grace and beauty, he
was the beau ideal of royalty, adored by nobles and burghers. Forming
an early attachment for one of his mother’s maids of honor, he insisted
for many years--the affection being mutual--on marrying her, but when
the succession devolved on him he manfully sacrificed individual
feeling to dynastic interests and contracted an alliance with Augusta,
Princess of Saxe Weimar. Though both understood that personal
preference played no part in their union, the most critical court
gossip could find nothing to condemn in their conjugal relations; she,
like Cæsar’s wife, above suspicion, yielding him wifely obedience;
he, like Bayard, _sans peur et sans reproche_, uniformly tender and
attentive. She was tall, stately, with regular features, cold, haughty
manner, every look and gesture suggesting ancestral pride and conscious
superiority, yet withal capable of warm attachments and loyal to
friends once tried. Devoted to art and literature, she was the friend
and patron of artists and scholars, and even when long past middle
life still devoted her mornings to study. They had two children, a son
named for the great Frederic and a daughter named for that adored Queen
Louisa, whose heroism in the Napoleonic struggle had won world-wide
recognition and admiration. The former, known in after years as
Frederic the Noble, Emperor of Germany, was a wilful, intractable boy,
represented in an unamiable light in many familiar anecdotes, yet his
career adorns the brightest page in his country’s history. The Prince
was devoted to these children, superintending their physical, mental
and spiritual development, instilling in their minds correct principles
and noble aims, and fitting them by study, discipline and example for
their destined high stations. He was standing with Louischen in his
arms one morning watching a military procession, when she, excited by
the music, sprang through an open window to the street below. Rushing
frantically down stairs he was relieved to find her in the arms of
a street urchin who, standing beneath the window, caught her as she
fell. Of course the boy’s fortune was made. The Prince, clasping his
darling to his breast, handed his watch and chain to her rescuer, and,
taking his name and address, volunteered his protection. They were
riding together in after years in Unter-den-Linden, he German Emperor,
she Grand Duchess of Baden, when Hoedel made his dastardly attempt
to assassinate his sovereign, and he springing forward to shield his
child, accomplished thereby his own deliverance. When Nobiling a few
months afterward, and near the same spot, fired at and severely wounded
his master, the Emperor’s first words on recovering from the shock
were: “Thank God, dear Louischen was not along to-day!”

The Prince’s palace was built during the Great Frederic’s reign,
and it is recorded that when the architect applied for a design the
King, who was out of humor, said, pointing to a mahogany bureau with
a zigzag front standing near: “Model it after that, adding as little
architectural frippery as possible.” In front stands Rauch’s famous
statue of the great ruler, nearby is the Alter Schloss, city residence
of Prussian monarchs, the new Opera House, and many handsome public
buildings.

Christmas Eve, 1847, though bitter cold, was bright and sunny, the
air clear and crisp was musical with sleigh bells, and the streets,
though ice bound, were gay with rejoicing crowds evidently imbued
with holiday influences. Directly after breakfast we went to the
Thiergarten Lake to witness the delightful entertainment given there
daily by Berlin’s far-famed Skating Club. The lake, large, smooth,
solid, mirroring a translucent sky, seemed with its banks lined with
brilliantly costumed spectators, to suggest and invite winter sport.
A military band, sheltered in a warm enclosure, played a succession
of inspiring airs, trained voices often joining in and enthusing both
onlookers and performers. The skaters executing many picturesque
movements, artistic pantomimes, exciting games, and dancing polkas,
mazurkas, cotillions, waltzes, were reputed the most skilful in
the world. Meyerbeer, who was a frequent visitor, is said to have
conceived there the beautiful skating scene in the opera _Le Prophete_
he was then composing. The costumes of the skaters were tasteful and
appropriate, the girls wearing short, narrow, heavy cloth skirts, with
tight fitting bodices, snug hoods or hats, and a profusion of bright
bows, rosettes and scarfs. The men were mostly in uniform, their
gay sashes, brilliant orders and decorations enhancing the charm of
their lithe, graceful figures. There were no accidents, no untoward
occurrences, and the glorious morning proved a delightful prelude
to an unforgetable evening. Fraulein von Boyen had given us minute
directions as to our costumes and the prescribed etiquette, saying:
“Dress simply and inexpensively, be careful never to turn your backs on
royal personages, never address remarks or questions to them, allowing
them the initiative in conversation.”

Promptly at three o’clock we alighted at the palace _porte cochere_,
and ascending the marble steps, at the top and bottom of which stood
armed sentinels, were received by liveried ushers and conducted through
the beautiful hall and up the flower-lined stairs to the state drawing
rooms where a lady-in-waiting met us and accompanied us through a
number of superbly-furnished, beautifully-decorated rooms to the _salle
de musique_, where Fraulein von Boyen welcomed us, and, escorting us
to the centre of the _salle_, presented us to Her Royal Highness, the
Crown Princess.

The _salle_, large and spacious,--tessellated floor, frescoed ceiling,
walls hung with mirrors and pictures, exquisite bronzes and statues
alternating with palms, ferns and flowering plants,--had at its extreme
end a flower-trimmed stage, the lowered curtain of which suggested a
dramatic performance. Rows of handsomely-cushioned arm chairs were in
front of the stage, and just beyond them stood the Crown Princess,
surrounded by her royal cousins, children of her father’s brothers.
Among her guests were Lady Rose, daughter of Lord Westmoreland, English
Ambassador, some other youthful members of the Diplomatic Corps and
about forty or fifty maids and youths, children of personal attendants
of the Princess.

The Crown Princess, then entering her teens, received us without
hesitation or timidity, and we marveled at her self-possession and
familiarity with court etiquette; though modest and gentle, there was
a notable absence of self-assertion. Dressed in a blue challis trimmed
with swan’s down, her only ornament was a gold chain around her bare
neck from which hung a medallion miniature of her grandmother, said to
be her father’s Christmas present. Fair, with blue eyes, light brown
hair worn simply plaited down her back, she was a perfect type of
happy, innocent girlhood, her plump, rounded proportions bespeaking
health and strength, her bright, expressive face beaming with hope
and content. The girls were dressed in bright woolens, bare necks and
arms without ornaments; the youths wore the uniforms of the regiments
in which they were enrolled as cadets. The Crown Prince, who stood
near his sister and gracefully assisted her, wore the uniform of the
Royal Guards, in which he already held a command. Tall, slender,
rather good looking, he impressed us as being dignified and refined,
though grave and reserved. There was some stir when the King and Queen,
followed by the Prince and Princess, entered unannounced. The Crown
Princess, stepping forward, greeted them cordially, then taking first
the Queen’s, then her mother’s, then the King’s, hands, kissed them
respectively. She then took her father’s, but folding her in his arms
he kissed her tenderly on the brow. Everybody smiled--a touch of nature
makes the whole world akin.

The King and Queen, though plain and unattractive in person and
manner, were kind, charitable, devoted to each other, conscientious
in the discharge of their public duties and universally popular. They
moved unceremoniously about the _salle_, chatting pleasantly with
their niece’s guests and seemingly finding the scene enjoyable. My
brother said next day: “At first disappointed, I was glad the King
and Queen did not wear their crowns, for if they had they would not
have talked so freely with us.” After the arrival of some other royal
personages, followed by a number of gorgeously-uniformed officers
and some handsomely-dressed maids of honor, attendants on the Queen
and Princess, the ladies-in-waiting distributed the programmes,
gilt-engraved, embossed cards, and escorting the Queen and Princess
to the front chairs, assigned us to those in the rear.

[Illustration: The Old Sans Souci Mill]

The programme read:


  PANORAMIC PRELUDE.

  FIRST PART.

  _Scenes from the Story of the Nativity._

    1st SCENE.--Annunciation: Hail Mary! Blessed art thou among women!

    2nd SCENE.--Adoration of the Magi: We hail Thee, King Of the Jews.

    3rd SCENE.--The Flight into Egypt: Arise, take the young Child,
      flee into Egypt, and be there until I bring thee word.

    4th SCENE.--Transfiguration: This is My Beloved Son, in Whom I am
      well pleased. Hear ye Him.


  SECOND PART.

  _Scenes from Prussian History._

    1st SCENE.--Economy and Industry kingly attributes: King Frederic
      noticing a crowd watching a shop-window picture, depicting a
      shabbily-dressed old man, a _fac simile_ of himself, who, holding
      a coffee-mill, turned the handle with one hand and with the other
      caught the falling coffee grains, ordered the picture to be
      lowered so his subjects could see, without craning their necks,
      what a thrifty king they had.

    2nd SCENE.--In Prussia Justice outranks Power: An unsightly old
      mill obscuring the view from Sans Souci, King Frederic determined
      to buy and remove it. The miller, however, refusing to sell, the
      agent said: “Don’t choose to sell, indeed! You forget His Majesty
      can seize your mill and clap you in jail.” “Not,” said the miller,
      “while we have the Kammer-gericht here in Berlin.” The King,
      hearing the agent’s report, said: “The miller is right; here in
      Prussia Justice outranks Power.”

    3rd SCENE.--Honor to whom honor is due: Queen Louisa, as patriotic
      as gracious, visited the Prussian camp after the battle of Yena,
      and with her own hands bestowed the order of the Black Eagle on
      those heroes most conspicuous in defense of King and Fatherland.

[Illustration: William I., Emperor of Germany]

An invisible choir chanted to piano accompaniment during the first part
of the program some sacred anthems; during the first two scenes of the
second part, the “Prussian Battle Hymn,” and during the last scene,
“God Save the Queen,” adding greatly to the scenic effect. After the
curtain fell there was an interval of lively, friendly conversation,
everybody commenting on the Panoramic Prelude and pronouncing it
excellent, unique, inimitable. We were told that the Crown Princess,
consulting with her governess, had herself selected the scenes, which
were copies of well-known pictures in the Berlin Art Gallery, and
managed their arrangement, declining the proffered services of some
professional decorators. It was edifying to note the ill-concealed
delight of the royal parents at the success of their daughter’s
undertaking, every feature and action bespeaking that parental pride
which, in prince or peasant, nabob or pauper, is more becoming than any
human adornment.

About half-past four o’clock a heavy portiere quietly opening displayed
in an adjoining room a large, brilliantly-lighted, artistically-trimmed
tree, its top almost reaching the ceiling, its outspreading branches
nearly filling the room. A murmur of delight was heard, and surely no
Hesperian garden or enchanted forest ever showed a braver specimen. The
King and Queen and royal personages led the way, and, merrily trooping
in, almost too eager for a nearer view to mind our P’s and Q’s, we
flitted to and fro around the tree. The decorations, consisting of
golden fruit, paper flowers and wreathes, stuffed birds and animals,
with bon-bons, confections and ornaments, spangled, tinseled, frosted,
of every conceivable hue and design, were crowned by a glittering
star. Here beneath a tuft of foliage would be a bright-plumaged bird
with outstretched wings, just beyond a squinting owl so life-like
we shrank from its expected screech; perched on this bough would
be a frog or lizard; on that one a squirrel, and above would crouch
a glossy leopard. Beneath the tree on soft green moss were piled
the presents--presents for guests, friends, attendants, young and
old; generally for the girls, work-baskets, needle-cases and toilet
dainties; for the boys, knives, pocket-books, fishing and hunting
implements. My present was a small dressing-case, my sister’s a silk
reticule, my brother’s a hunter’s horn.

The Crown Princess was, of course, generously remembered, and seemed
much pleased with our offering, an Indian basket curiously wrought
with shells, bird feathers and sweet grasses and containing a pair of
moccasins and a watch-case, all made by Indians of Northern New York.
Neither her presents to members of the royal household nor theirs to
her were displayed.

Old Baron Humboldt, who was the best-known and most popular member of
Berlin society, often called the court _enfant gâté_ (spoiled child),
acted as Kris Kringle, and played the rôle to perfection, the King and
Prince of Prussia serving as his aides and leading in the merriment
his happy jokes excited. The bon-bons and fancy confections on the
tree were divided among us and promptly disposed of, though the other
decorations were undisturbed, the tree being intended, presumably, for
use on another occasion. After the presents had been distributed the
Baron, turning to the Crown Princess, said with mock humility: “Having
accomplished my task, I await further orders from Your Royal Highness.”
“And I,” said she, handing him a box containing a gold pen, “order you,
honored Baron, to reserve this pen for the sonnets and madrigals to be
henceforth indited to your lady-loves.” These words, the Baron being
a confirmed old bachelor, never having been known in all his life to
express a preference for any woman, caused a general titter.

We were invited to partake of a collation in the state dining-room--
bouillon, _eau sucree_, cold meats, salads, ices, cakes and divers
confections. The King, Queen and royal personages occupied tables
at the upper end of the room and enjoyed probably a more elaborate
_menu_, with Champagne and Johannisberg; we were at tables lower down,
the Crown Princess, her brother and royal cousins being at one in our
midst. The hilarity usual when young people, always hungry, enjoy
appetizing eatables prevailed.

At the close of the repast the King, Queen and other royalties rose
and passed down the room, bowing right and left. The Crown Princess
then rose, and, stopping at each table, smilingly bade her guests
good-night. Guided by Fraulein von Boyen and the ladies-in-waiting
we then returned to the _Salle de Musique_, where, superintending
the donning of our wraps and being sure that our attendant footmen
were on hand, they received our adieux. By half-past seven we were
back at home, having enjoyed an entertainment which, though formal
and ceremonious, punctilious etiquette being observed, was free from
stiffness or constraint and devoid of anything that could offend
republican pride. Though the marks setting apart those of royal
blood were unmistakable, what refined courtesy, what kindly grace
characterized their intercourse with their unroyal associates! There
were no suggestions of the _nouveaux riches_ or parvenue autocrats,
everything betokening generations of culture and refinement,
ancestral dignity, inherited power and withal a simplicity and
modesty characteristic of self-respecting superiority. The costumes
of the Queen and Princesses were elegant and tasteful, their superb
satins, velvets, brocades, their sparkling jewels, becoming them as
the appropriate setting of rare gems. And those brave, lordly men! so
chivalric and gentle, so noble and courteous. How appropriate seemed
their orders and decorations. Truly the bravest are the tenderest!




THE ALCALDE’S DAUGHTER AND

HER CHRISTMAS LAMP

[Illustration]


Long years ago, while the Mexican standard still waved over the Alamo,
San Antonio de Bexar, the most flourishing Catholic Mission east of
the Rio Grande, rejoiced in an Alcalde as famous for wisdom and virtue
as for piety and goodness. Successful in his public enterprises, he
was equally fortunate in his private relations, having a beautiful
wife, an inviting home, and a brood of stalwart sons. That they had no
daughter was much regretted by both, Donna Inez saying: “Boys serve
to perpetuate the name and uphold the family honor, but it is the
girls who, lifting the domestic burden from the mothers’ shoulders,
and cheering, comforting the fathers, bless and brighten home,” and,
when in answer to repeated _Novenas_ of prayer and votive offerings,
a daughter was born to them, they, naming her Maria Jesusa Pepita,
gratefully dedicated her to the Virgin. Growing in beauty and grace and
developing many lovable traits, Jesusa more than fulfilled parental
hopes. Humoring, petting her father, preparing his _pulque_, filling
his pipe, she became his daily companion and the idol of his heart.

Don Pedro’s office, adjoining the Alamo, then garrisoned by Mexican
troops ordered to report to him and serve him when needed, was really
the High Court of Justice where the Mission officials met to consider
public matters, whether civil, religious or military. His home,
the most spacious and pretentious at the Mission, was a one-story,
flat-roof _adobe_ structure, with about fifteen chambers separated
by quaint halls, corridors and alcoves, and stood back of the Alamo
amid extensive grounds, which, irrigated by a large _acequia_, teemed
with rare, beautiful flowers, with orange, lemon and citron trees,
with vine-covered bowers and arcades almost hidden beneath clusters
of luscious grapes. Some curious animals roamed in these beautiful
grounds, and among those specially petted and cared for by Jesusa
were Chihuahua dogs, tricky and playful; Maltese cats, soft-eyed
fawns, white rabbits, and a canary bird which, as it tuned up when the
matin and vesper bells rang, was supposed to be under the Virgin’s
protection. Though an earnest defender of the faith, Don Pedro
was a devotee of those sports--cock fighting, bull fighting, card
playing--patronized by his associates. He had a cock pit in his yard
for the rearing and training of game cocks, where their mettle was
often tried Sunday afternoons, and on his Salado ranch, where, in spite
of frequent Indian raids, his family spent much time, he had a breed of
superior bulls imported from Spain.

[Illustration: The Alamo]

Opposite the Alamo on the slope leading to the river stood a number of
_jacals_ tenanted by humble Mexican families, with one of whom lived a
boy and girl supposed from their fair complexions, blue eyes and light
hair, to be stragglers from the western white settlements, and who were
known as the Americanos--the boy being called Cano and the girl Cana.
Though kindly cared for by their protectors--Mexicans are proverbially
patient and indulgent with children--they never affiliated with their
playmates, but, holding themselves aloof, seemed to be ever brooding
over some secret sorrow. The boy, smart and ingenious, was often seen
hanging round the Alamo, where doing odd jobs for the garrison and
making himself useful, he became a great favorite. Jesusa, generous,
unselfish, sympathetic, was as popular with the Mission juveniles as
the Alcalde with their elders. Noticing Cana watching her bird one
morning, she invited her to come in and become acquainted with her
pets. Children easily become friends, a certain free-masonry opening
their hearts and drawing them together, and Jesusa, improving the
meeting in the garden, became the generous patron of Cana, constantly
making her presents and treating her to unexpected pleasures.

San Antonio, though isolated from social and commercial privileges
and almost exclusively absorbed in religious interests, was gay and
sociable, fandangoes, card parties, _alfresco_ banquets, at which
the famous Mexican dishes--tortillas, tomales, frijoles, chile con
carne, dulces con fruta--were served in perfection, being of frequent
occurrence. Holidays abounded, Saints’ Days, National Anniversaries,
Family Fêtes being carefully and elaborately observed, and at no place
was Christmas celebrated with more pomp and solemnity. Two San Antonio
Christmas observances--the Pastores and Christmas Lamp--deserve special
notice. The former was a species of dramatic performance intended to
represent the Passion of Christ, and given every night during Christmas
week; the latter was founded on the familiar legend that the Infant
Jesus, descending from His Father’s Heavenly Throne to His Virgin
Mother’s Arms, noticed a lighted lamp hanging near an humble home, and
learning that it was intended to commemorate the guiding of the Magi
by the Star of Bethlehem to His lowly manger, blessed the home and its
inmates, leaving as visible marks of His Favor some desired presents.

On Christmas Eve, 183--, much excitement prevailed at the Mission, it
being announced that the Alcalde had contributed a generous sum towards
improving and adorning the hall to be used for the Pastores, which
would be represented on a handsomer scale than ever before, and that
Padre Ignacio, the San Fernando priest, who, officiating for many years
at christenings, marriages, funerals, and hearing confessions, imposing
penances or granting indulgences--thus becoming the Alter Ego of devout
San Antonians--had, yielding to the solicitations of some influential
San Fernando parishioners, consented to bless the lamps in church, thus
giving them public consecration. Heretofore, they had only been blessed
privately. Many of them, a few being costly and ornate, were heirlooms,
having belonged to the parents, grand-parents, great-grand-parents, of
their owners, and being endeared by tender domestic associations.

Until a certain age children were not allowed to handle Christmas
lamps, their parents acting for them; and attaining the prescribed
age, were required by fasting and prayer to prepare themselves for
the ceremony, the failure of the Holy Child to notice their lamps and
leave some mark of favor being regarded as the severest of rebukes.
An importance somewhat similar to the assuming of the toga by Roman
youths, or to the reception by sovereigns of royal courtiers, was
attached to the function. The plazas de Yslas y de Armas, adjoining
San Fernando, generally crowded on afternoons with rancheros driving
bargains or computing gains and losses, were filled on the Christmas
Eve referred to with devout lamp-bearing worshippers wending their
way to church. Padre Ignacio officiated at the Vesper service, then
pronouncing the benediction retired to the Sacristy, where he laid
aside his altar vestments and, returning to the Church wearing his
plain priestly robe, stood outside the chancel rail and awaited the
lamp-bearers desiring his blessing, who, advancing in line, knelt
before him. Taking each lamp in his hand he made over it the sign of
the cross, and having blessed them all said solemnly: “_Domine, ad
adjuvandem vos festina_.” It was an impressive scene, deeply moving
the lamp-bearers, who, returning home, lighted and hung their lamps
on previously-selected poles or bushes, where shining like stars in
the quiet skies they seemed to reflect the simple, trusting faith
characteristic of all sincere followers of Christ.

The Alcalde, deeply interested, burnished and prepared with his own
hands his daughter’s lamp, she being too young to do so herself; then
lighting it, hung it--ignoring his own preference for a secluded nook
near her window--in an obscure angle of an unfrequented corner of the
Alamo which she, as familiar with the Alamo as with her own home, had
chosen. It happened to be just under the hall where Bowie, Crockett,
Travis, and their brave comrades made their desperate stand some years
later against Santa Anna and where, sealing with their blood their
devotion to liberty and independence, they enriched human annals with
that sublimest of all sublime records.


THE PASTORES

Picture a large barn-like hall without doors or windows, hard dirt
floor, rough-plastered walls on which some oil lamps and tallow candles
in wooden brackets smoke and cast a dim spectral light. A platform
raised about two feet above the floor and extending across the entire
back of the hall serves as a stage, and some large, striped Mexican
blankets do duty as a drop curtain. The actors remain all the time
on the stage, those taking part in the scenes advance to the center,
play their rôles, then retire to the sides where those not acting
gather behind the curtain and are supposed to be invisible. There was
no attempt at scenic effect, no applause, but absorbed, unflagging
attention. In front of the stage were some large chairs, in which Don
Pedro, Donna Inez and other distinguished personages were seated;
back of the chairs were rows of benches occupied by well-dressed men
and women, and in open spaces behind and on the sides of the benches
a motley crowd of women wearing _rebosas_ and sewing, knitting, or
plaiting and combing their hair, and men wearing _sombreros_ and
drinking _pulque_, smoking, or playing cards, sat flat on the floor.
After rather a long wait, some musicians sitting near the stage sang
to a guitar accompaniment some disconnected strains from church chants
or masses. The curtain, parting and being drawn aside, discloses two
men, the one fair, handsome and well-dressed, representing the Angel
of God, the other dark, ugly, with a club foot and horns projecting
above a lowering brow, representing the devil, who have an excited
dispute about the advent of the expected Redeemer. These two men appear
in every scene. Then follow in regular succession the Annunciation,
the Adoration of the Magi, Christ in the Temple, the Temptation, the
Crucifixion, the Empty Sepulchre, all being taken literally from the
Bible. In the last scene the Devil kneels before the Angel of God,
acknowledges the Divinity of Christ, and begs to be admitted to the
community of the Redeemed.

[Illustration: The Alcalde’s Daughter]

The Virgin was personated by a young, beautiful, pure-looking woman;
Christ by a handsome, refined youth; Pontius Pilate by a large,
vulgar-looking man; Herodias by a saucy, bold girl; Mary Magdalene by
a pale, forlorn looking woman. There were occasional intermissions
during which the singers treated the audience to some rather sweet
music. A cynic, marveling that the managers of the Pastores should
select scenes from a Bible they never read, might describe the
performance as a travesty of a faith they would die to defend, yet he
would have to acknowledge the earnest interest taken by the audience
to be significant of the human sympathy always aroused by the story of
Bethlehem.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most pleasant of Christmas Eve duties, arranging the childrens’
presents near or under the lighted lamps, followed the Pastores.
Occasionally a lamp would be hung in a chapel or other preferred place
not adjoining the family home, there being no danger of its being
molested, a certain sacredness protecting both lamp and presents.

Waking early, Jesusa crept on tip-toe from her little room and hurried
to the spot where her lamp had been hung, trembling with glad
expectancy of the beautiful things she hoped to find there. A light
still flickered in it, but there was nothing beneath or near it. What
could it mean? She stood a moment spell-bound, then recalling some
childish misdemeanors she burst into tears, and falling on her knees,
sobbed: “I have been wicked. I was not worthy of Thy favor, Holy Child
of God! Thou hast seen fit to punish me.” Don Pedro and Donna Inez,
hearing her leave the house, had followed her, wishing to see her
delight at the pleasant surprises they had prepared for her. “Wicked,
indeed,” said he; “the angels in heaven are not purer. Some thief
has despoiled you. We’ll catch him, punish him and force him to make
restitution.”

Though slow to anger and prone to mercy, he was so incensed that he
summoned the Mission Council to meet at once in his office to consider
an important matter. A night guard at the Alamo testified that making
his rounds he saw the white girl called Cana cross the street and go
round the corner where the lamp hung; that later he saw her again cross
the street and return home, but that seeing her often playing with
Jesusa he suspected nothing, and did not follow her. However, when
relieved from duty, he picked up near the corner she had passed the
_dulces_ and ribbon end, which he there and then produced. The Mexican
woman with whom the child lived testified that early that morning Cana
had divided with her children a box of _dulces_, and had given her a
bow from which the ribbon end had evidently been detached, claiming
to have found them. Cana when arrested and brought to the Alcalde’s
office, denied bitterly any knowledge of either _dulces_ or ribbon,
then when cross-questioned she became confused and finally began
crying: “I knew where Jesusa meant to hang her lamp. I was curious to
see what she had, then I don’t know how or why I did it, I grabbed her
things, carried them home and hid them in the hole at the foot of the
hill.”

Jesusa, who had been sitting on a stool at her father’s feet, slipped
to Cana’s side and gently took her hand. “Don’t cry, Cana,” said she.
“You’ve done nothing wrong. You knew I would be willing for you to
have them.” “Señor Alcalde,” said one of the Council, a tall, dark
man with a loud, harsh voice, “justice and public safety demand the
punishment of criminals, and I move that this self-convicted thief be
fined twenty-five pesos and in default of payment of said fine that
she be stripped and publicly flogged, then confined during Christmas
week in the Mission jail.” Cano, who, hanging his head in shame, had
crouched behind the door, here sprang forward, fell on his knees and
grasping Jesusa’s hand, prayed: “Oh! Jesusa, don’t let them strip and
flog my sister. I have strong arms and keen eyes. I will work and earn
the money to pay for the things Cana, poor little weak lamb, took. For
the love of God, for the Holy Virgin’s sake, don’t let them whip her.”
Jesusa, kindly pressing his hand, said: “Have no fear,” then throwing
her arms round her father’s neck, cried: “_Padre mio, caro padre mio_,
you have never refused a request. Don’t let them harm Cana.” “Be quiet,
my love”; then turning to the Junta he said firmly (and Don Pedro knew
well how and when to assume the air of authority): “I will pay this
child’s fine and give her the protection of my home. I also adjourn the
_Junta_.”

He then summoned the Mexican with whom the children lived and obtained
from him the following story:

“As has been my custom for some time, I went last year to the Comanche
Camp on the Pecos for trading purposes, and while there noticed two
white children whose miserable condition excited my pity and caused me
to ask the chief who they were and where they came from. Evading my
questions at first, he finally told me that he had stolen them while on
a horse-raiding expedition to the Brazos; that going through the woods
late one evening near a house occupied by apparently well-to-do people,
he saw the children gathering pecans, and creeping up to them, seized
them, strapped them to the back of his horse and fled, expecting to
ransom them for a considerable sum. He sent an agent to make terms with
the parents, but the agent, returning, reported that the affair had
created such a stir he thought it unadvisable to broach the subject. I
proposed a trade, and he agreed to take for them a mule, a bridle and
a red blanket. I brought them home, intending to try for the ransom,
but I did not know how to go about it.” “Speaking of ransom, for how
much could you, _amigo mio_, be induced to relinquish all claims to
these children?” asked the Alcalde. “_Señor_, you know me to be a poor
man with a family to support, and needing money badly. Otherwise, I
would present them to your honor. Would you be willing to offer twenty
_pesos?_” “Here are fifty _pesos_. Read and sign this agreement, which,
as you will see, transfers to me your right and claim to them.”

Obtaining the requisite authority, the Alcalde engaged a man, known
to be trustworthy, to take charge of the _Americanos_, go with them
to the neighborhood designated, hunt up their parents and restore to
them their stolen children. Supplying them with clothes and giving to
each one a well-filled purse, the Alcalde said, on parting with them:
“Never forget that you owe your deliverance from captivity, and your
restoration to home and friends, to Jesusa, and remember her in your
prayers.”

The leave-taking between the two little girls could not have been more
affecting had they been sisters, and Cano’s trembling lips and tearful
eyes as he bade Jesusa good-bye expressed more eloquently than words
the grateful emotions surging in his brave boyish heart. In due time
letters came from the rejoicing parents invoking God’s blessing on the
kind-hearted, generous Alcalde. Believing that their little ones had,
lost in the woods, perished from starvation, or been drowned in the
Brazos, they had mourned them as dead.

The night following the disappointing morning and the harrowing scene
in her father’s office found little Jesusa ready for bed betimes. While
she slept, Donna Inez, entering her room noiselessly, hung above her
cot a picture depicting the healing of Jairus’ daughter, and opposite
a scroll inscribed, “Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy,” both scroll and picture being the work of the Nuns at the
Mission Convent, who, hearing of Jesusa’s defense of Cana, aspired to
play the part of rewarding spirits; and nearby, a doll dressed as a
queen and many playthings and trinkets calculated to please a little
girl.

[Illustration: San Fernando Cathedral]

Awaking and seeing the scroll, Jesusa supposed she must be dreaming,
then noticing her other treasures, she sprang from bed, calling: “Come
_madre_, come _padre_; the angels have been here. See what they brought
me. It must mean that the Holy Child smiles on me. You will go with
me, will you not, _carrissimos_, to church and join me in grateful
thanks for His Divine Favor,” and the adoring parents, unrestrained by
thoughts of superstition or deception, encouraged their trusting child
in her innocent delusion.

Eventful changes fill the succeeding years. The Texas settlers in the
towns and counties contiguous to San Antonio, finding the tyranny
and injustice of the Mexican authorities intolerable, determine to
throw off all allegiance to them and organize a separate, independent
government. The wise and effective means of resistance adopted
culminate in the struggles at Gonzales and Goliad, where the Texans win
decisive victories.

Emboldened by success, they advance on San Antonio, defended by General
Cos with a large Mexican force, and after eight days of continuous
skirmishing compel him to surrender. Entering the town, they garrison
the Alamo with Texas troops and hoist over it the Lone Star Flag.
The Alcalde, loyal to duty, had rendered valuable assistance to the
Mexican commander and, when the latter retreated, retired with his
family to his Salado ranch where, detained by Donna Inez’s serious
illness, he remained until the recapture of San Antonio by Santa Anna
restored Mexican supremacy. His two eldest sons fell at Goliad, bravely
defending their national colors, and the two younger ones were killed
a year later in a skirmish on the Rio Grande. Returning to San Antonio
the day after the massacre of the brave defenders of the Alamo, he was
shocked at the atrocities committed by Santa Anna and, condemning them
in unmeasured terms, kindly sought to alleviate the sufferings of the
Texans still remaining at the mission.

The defeat of Santa Anna at San Jacinto and his subsequent inglorious
return to Mexico, effectually relieved Texas from Mexican thraldom,
though the alternate occupation of San Antonio by Texans under Hays and
Howard, and by Mexicans under Vasquez and Woll, resulted in prolonging
chaotic conditions there for some years.

Don Pedro, gracefully yielding to the inevitable, made no effort to
exercise his official functions after the organization of the Texas
government. Known, however, as the Alcalde, he was deferred to by both
Texans and Mexicans, and, always found acting with the upright and
orderly, lost neither public respect nor influence.

When General Sam Houston was elected and inaugurated President of the
Republic of Texas the citizens of San Antonio invited him to visit
their town, and, on his acceptance of the invitation, they determined
to give him a public reception to conclude with a ball and banquet. The
Alcalde, asked to act as chairman of the reception committee, surprised
every one by agreeing to do so and by advancing a handsome contribution
towards defraying the expenses of the reception. The ball was given in
the large hall of the Veramendi House and proved a gratifying success.
President Houston was accompanied by his Staff, Chief of which was a
handsome young officer, Captain Osborn, who, enlisting as a private
at San Jacinto, had been promoted on the battlefield for conspicuous
gallantry. He was selected to open the ball with the Alcalde’s
daughter, Don Pedro himself presenting him to her. Then in the
efflorescence of her maidenly charms, Jesusa was so lovely, her voice
was so musical, her manner so gracious, that all hearts involuntarily
crowned her queen of love and beauty.

And Captain Osborn, could he resist such fascinations? _Nous verrons._
Following the ball came a dinner at the Alcalde’s, then other
entertainments given by hospitable San Antonians, at all of which
Captain Osborn was Jesusa’s devoted attendant. People smiled and said:
“How well they suit! What a fine match it would be!” Captain Osborn
accompanied the President back to Washington, the first Capital of
Texas, but returned to San Antonio in a few weeks, when the Alcalde
announced his daughter’s betrothal to President Houston’s Chief of
Staff.

One evening the lovers were walking together near the Alamo when he
asked: “Do you remember once hanging a Christmas lamp in the angle of
that corner?” “Of course I do. It is one of the dearest of my childish
memories.” “And do you remember a little boy who once knelt to you
in your father’s office and implored you to protect his sister?”
“Oh!” said she, the light of memory restoring the boyish cast to his
features, and recalling as if by magic that exciting scene, “Can it be?
Yes, you must be, you are Cano.” “The dream of my life, Jesusa, has
been to meet you again, and meeting you, the most cherished hope of my
heart has been to win your love.” “Well, you have succeeded,” said she
archly.

Of course, Padre Ignacio, her life-long friend and confessor, who had
christened her and blessed her at her first communion, officiated
at the Nuptial Mass, and who could wonder if amid the decorations
transforming the San Fernando altar into a mass of fragrant bloom
there hung a Christmas lamp, whose flickering light, though obscured
by the glorious sunshine flooding the church, cast a mild benison-like
radiance over the young couple--brave soldier boy and maiden
fair--plighting their wedded troth there, a radiance betokening faith,
hope and undying love.

[Illustration]




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75118 ***
